whenever we fly out of gliding range of
our home airfield we run the risk of
landing out whilst food landings
obviously require greater portion and
care than are landing at our home field
they should not be considered dangerous
or difficult like many things in gliding
the more we do that easier it becomes
they are far less of a hurdle if they
are first taught and practiced in a
motor glider with a suitably qualified
and experienced instructor even this has
its drawbacks however and a single
session cannot best only provide a
snapshot of what fields are available in
the immediate vicinity of the home
airfield at any one time of the year to
become competent at fewer landings it is
necessary to have looked at many fields
in different areas and various seasons
this presentation sets out to do just
that it is based on the experience and
knowledge of seasoned cross-country
pilots who between them have landed in
hundreds of fields we will look at a
variety of fields and where possible
revisit those fields at different times
of the year to see how they have changed
with the seasons most the fields looked
at will be in the south of the UK but
the same principles apply wherever we
fly what will change with geographical
location will be the average size of
field available and the proportion of
crop fields to grazing fields as we
change from mainly arable farming to
largely stock farming the fields tend to
become smaller with pasture becoming
more prevalent
let's begin by looking at the process of
field selection
we generally choose fields in the order
of size allied with color and wind
direction which we'll look at later then
slope and finally surface we do it in
that order because from the height above
the ground that we should start to
closely consider the field Landing say
1500 feet or so we can clearly see the
size and color of a great many fields in
the immediate area you should be aware
of the wind direction and should be able
to pick up on clues that will give an
indication of the surface wind
we cannot however easily discern the
slope of the ground until we're closer
to it in other words lower finally we
can begin to pick up the detail of the
surface only when we get down to 1,000
feet or so along with surface detail and
suitability we can also check for likely
obstructions that might get in our way
and plan the circuit accordingly with
practice it is possible to speed of the
process of selection enabling a much
quicker assessment and a more certain
selection let's look at some fields
you
here we see typical countryside in the
South of England this is the end of July
where we'll see later how things change
with the season but here we are
interested only in the size of the
available fields because it's midsummer
the dominant colors are yellow or green
looking at the picture they're very size
fields in view some are quite large from
this height we could glide the fields
about halfway to the horizon obviously
what depends on the wind and the glider
and the amount of sync we encounter but
generally that's a good guess we can see
large green fields in the distance at
the top of the picture which we could
easily reach which look quite promising
lots of others that are obviously crop
of some description we are at about two
thousand feet here whilst we are not
desperate we should be spending more and
more of our tension on looking for
possible fields rather than trying to
find lift the lower we gets the more
attention we should get the field
landing at this height we can afford to
spend a little time getting into a good
position to either climb away a good
lift or examine suitable fields in the
area at the moment we are simply looking
at size if we look at the field in the
middle foreground disregarding the
surface for the moment we can see a
collection houses along the near edge so
size and color you can see from a
distance and it's a good idea to move
towards likely-looking fields that are
the correct color for time of year while
you still have the height to do so a
little closer to that field we are down
to about 1500 feet we can see houses
running along one side by looking at
this feature we can immediately gauge
the size of that field and with it the
scale of the fields and the surrounding
area using those houses as a scale try
superimposing your airfield on this
picture
we could easily land a glider in that
field approaching from the top of the
frame and landing towards the houses
assuming the wind allowed for such an
approach so by taking a familiar feature
we can estimate the size the fields are
about this is an important process
because in an area where the fields are
small even a field of modest proportions
would look enormous we can see that our
field does not look especially large
there are a bigger fields around the
area but using our scale technique we
know it is more than adequate
here we are in a different area at a
different time of year it's late spring
and there are several fields of quite
thick dense crop some fields bright
yellow with rape flowers while others
are pasture and some with cattle grazing
the fields are much smaller than in the
previous picture but looking at the
field highlighted and comparing it with
the size of the houses and farm
buildings we can see it is indeed
suitable for a landing
as far as size is concerned but it is
considerably smaller than the field
identified in the previous slide of
course we will have to look more closely
at this field if we are considering an
approach into it for instance if you
look closely you can identify some
overhead wires running across the right
of the field to the farm buildings we
will look at wires later but as an
example we might consider an approach
landing from left to right as we look at
this picture assuming the wind was
favourable
you
an additional consideration as far as
size is concerned is that of obstacles
on the approach approaching over low
fence or hedge for instance is not a
problem but replace that low boundary
with a line of trees and it effectively
reduces the available size of the field
in this field for example our field is
effectively longer if we make an
approach from left to right across the
low fence then it would be if we
approached over the trees making an
approach over an obstacle will reduce
the size of field by up to 8 times the
height of the obstacle that's as steep
as you can practically make an approach
with air break take a typical mature oak
tree of say 100 foot if we were to make
an approach over this tree the first
eight hundred feet of our field would be
unusable
we simply cannot descend the glider
steeply enough to be able to use this
part of the landing area the field
effectively becomes 800 feet shorter for
our purposes it is of course important
to be aware the wind direction
throughout your flight you will learn
that knowing the wind direction will
prove very useful when trying to assess
where to look for lift relative to the
grounds when you get low for instance it
will also dictate strategy on each leg
of your task when the wind plays a
significant factor it is of course vital
that you make a correct assessment the
wind strength and direction before a
field landing many a potential ez field
landing has turned into a disaster
because the pilot did not properly
assess the wind when it comes to the
actual landing of course we should
approach into wind if at all possible or
rather as much into wind as possible a
certain amount of crosswind is
acceptable the amount depends upon the
wind strength and the available length
of the field an obvious way of
effectively increasing the available
landing distance is by choose chosing an
approach search that we would land
across the diagonal of the field
accepting less of a headwind in strong
winds this might prove tricky but then
on these occasions the wind is probably
strong enough
so as not to require this extra distance
there are usually many indications of
the wind direction in this picture we
can clearly see smoke it may be a fact
your chimney or power station or a fire
somewhere usually we can see smoke
somewhere during the flight and that
should be enough to update our
perception of the wind direction we
might pick up the wind direction from
the drift present whilst climbing on a
thermal or the cloud shadow movement
across the ground remember however that
anything that shows the wind at flying
height cloud shadow or thermal drift for
example will not show the true wind on
the ground
generally the wind at the ground level
can be 30 to 40 degrees back that's
anti-clockwise from the wind height but
it gives a good reference we can also
identify the wind direction and to a
certain extent its strength from the
ripple as it makes and a corn crop
principally barley we can see a distinct
wave caused by the winds and this is a
very good indication of the direction
was strong wind day but only of course
if the crop is long and therefore lonely
later in the season so if at all
possible we would plan to land into the
winds that way we can accept a slightly
shorter field or to put it another way
we effectively make the field longer by
landing into the wind as we said
previously a degree of crosswind is
acceptable but that depends on the size
the field and the wind strength and
direction in some circumstances it may
be necessary to accept a crosswind in
order to give a better approach over
obstructions it's a question of degree
before leaving the subject of size it
should be said that the biggest is not
necessarily the best we are not looking
for the largest field around we are
looking for the most suitable and one
criteria is size which must be adequate
but it need not be the biggest in
general large fields tend to be used for
crop production it's more cost-effective
for the farmer to work one large field
and several smaller ones consequently
when the crop has grown beyond a certain
length
that field becomes unsuitable for
landing until it is harvested an
available size can very much depend on
the season
you
let's now consider slope in general we
cannot land down a slope even a gentle
slope will add many hundreds of meters
to our acquired landing distance we can
land up a slope with care and face with
a field landing on sloping ground it
would be preferable to land uphill
rather than downhill even if this means
we land downwind but if all that is
available is a sloping field then you
have started your field selection
procedure too late and you should have
considered a field availability sooner
in order to give greater choice if a
sloping field is inevitable then you
should approach to land up the slope
regardless of the wind direction so
slope is very important and we should
spend some of the time we have available
looking for and assessing any slope that
is present in order to be able to reject
the field or take that slope into
account when planning a landing let's
get back to trying to identify the slope
any slope that is visible from 1500 feet
or so is unacceptable and even steep
slopes can be difficult to detect from
overhead the field to see a slope we
have to view the field from the side and
ideally to sides looking at the picture
we are considering the fields in the
center of the view its tilled with no
crops showing at the moment but
disregarding its surface if we simply
fly overhead or very close to the field
as we are now it looks reasonably flat
we are planning to land for the top of
the picture towards the bottom and at
the moment that looks okay but before we
make an approach we're going to fly
around the field maintaining enough
distance from it to enable us to view
the field as an angle as we approach the
end of our leg we will look back to see
the field from a different angle and now
we can see quite clearly that the field
is sloping and that slope is downhill in
our intended landing direction there is
another clue to slope in this picture we
can see and that is
the change in surface color across the
middle of the field I'm rolling into the
adjacent field it's their dues the
runoff of groundwater which needs a
different surface contrast this color
change adds a perspective to the field
that suggests a slope it's not always
there but when it is it's helpful it's
sure that least make you suspicious that
there is some slope to the field there
are some other indicators of slope we
can look at that should give us a clue
as to what the slope might be the
wriggling line is a stream and that
would suggest that the fields in this
picture will slope down towards the
stream not by very much in this picture
but you get the idea nature always makes
wriggling lines a straight line is
man-made a wriggling line is generally a
stream even if you can't see the water
dies in this scene a wriggling line of
bushes should suggest a stream and that
might help to determine slope let's
recap a slope must be identified before
it's too late
to take it into account or the field is
rejected if you can identify a slope
from the air it is too steep to land
down you cannot identify slope from
overhead if you have to land on sloped
land uphill even if this means downwind
an uphill landing will require a
substantial increase in your approach
speed much higher than for landing on
our level field during the round out
there is a much larger angle through
which the nose must be rotated
effectively you're attempting to fly
uphill until touchdown and that requires
a lot of extra energy as a rough guide
you should add around 10 knots for every
degree of upslope of course slope is not
easy to quantify so adding a good
healthy 15 or 20 knots to your normal
approach speed is not excessive you will
very quickly burn off this extra energy
during round out and subsequent very
short ground roll oh and don't leave
your round out
too late remember there is a greater
angle through which to rotate and that
would take an extra couple of seconds to
achieve surpassed err and round out
earlier
you
so we've looked at size then slope it's
time now to look at surface more
precisely what is growing the food we
are considering and can it accommodate
our landing in it a flat field that is
large enough to land a glider is a
valuable asset for the farmer and he's
going to try and make as much use of it
as possible it's almost always going to
be used for something because it is more
cost effective to work a large field the
biggest fields a useful crop production
this means at some times of the year the
biggest fields cannot be used here we
see the situation in early spring we can
see that almost all of the fields have
something growing in them mostly the
color is green but looking a little
closer we can identify numerous shades
of green there are few brown colors but
even these have a green tinge which
suggests very young crop just showing
through a crop may be either winter or
spring sown the term winter implies that
the crop was sown in the previous autumn
and has lain dormant over the winter
ready to grow as soon as the combination
of sunshine temperature and day length
produce the right conditions for growth
this will obviously vary depending exact
location the country may produce
variations of two to three weeks
depending on how far north we are a
winter sown crop will therefore be more
advanced in its growing cycle than a
spring so crop and as such will produce
a higher yield than its spring sown
cousin although generally of a poorer
quality looking at our fields again we
might assume that the dark green fields
to the top right may be a winter sown
wheat crop while the lighter colored
field next door may well be a spring
sown probably a barley crop which will
be less dense than a field of wheat
looking closer we can see that the
surface is cultivated it has been worked
and rolled prior to sewing leaving the
surface smooth and flat and the crop is
still quite small we can get away with a
landing and a crop field early in the
season all crops will be short and
we keeps our wings level as we land it
should be possible to land safely at
this time of year crops have a lot more
growing left to do and whilst a landing
glider will do some damage it will grow
out very quickly and as such will not
affect the final crop but because the
individual plants are small they have
very little root structure if there has
been recent rain the grounds may be
quite soft in which case you should be
prepared for a very short ground wrong
as a general rule if you can see earth
through the crop it should be okay for a
landing a good clue are the tramlines or
tractor readings the parallel lines up
and down the field if they are dark and
definite the crop is too tall if they
are showing earth through them then it
may be suitable if you can see Earth's
showing through the crop away from the
tramlines then the crop is almost
certainly suitable for landing with care
let's take a closer look at tractor
Wheeling's we can see the wedding's
clearly in this picture all taken around
the end of April to do the least amount
of damage to a crop and to more
precisely spray expensive fertilizers
and pesticides the farm will use the
same track over and over again and these
parallel lines in the field will be
visible throughout the season in all the
crops the tractor will make shallow ruts
if the surface is dry but in a wet
spring these roots may get very deep of
this machinery goes down the same truck
a few times the Wheeling's will stay for
the whole will of the season and so were
the ruts and as the ground dries during
the summer these ruts can be baked hard
it is always a good idea to land along
the Wheeling's parallel to them and
avoid landing across them some may be
very deep and deep enough to damage your
glider farm machinery turns not to work
well across slope so Wheeling's usually
run up and down any significant incline
another possible clue to a sloping field
we can see now the Wheeling's how they
look from the ground
this is a weak field in May although a
very dense crop a much too thick for a
successful landing this is after a dry
spring and the Wheeling's are quite
shallow and this is a barley field in
June after a particularly wet spring
this is about a foot deep and some
similar fields from the air the
Wheeling's are very obvious both in the
dark wheat fields and the much lighter
colored barley crops that write the
frame obviously if we see the field at
this stage of development of the crop we
would not choose to land in them before
moving on that let's take a look at
another springtime crop will see drape
by late March which is when this picture
is taken or you will see drape is
already too tall for a safe planned
landing planted in the previous autumn
and harvested in July or you will see
draped as not to grow quickly until
around early April it then begins to
grow very rapidly from about mid April
onwards and can put on eight to ten
centimeters per day at its peak by the
time we start get interested in fields
late module so the crop is already some
5 centimeters tall and looks like tall
cabbages although the surface is smooth
and flat under the crop because first
Lizer is added in February when the
ground is soft and wet the tractor
Wheeling's will be deep and dangerous
these will stay in the field once formed
all the way through past the harvest
around mid-april the crop will form
distinctive yellow flowers which will be
visible for miles around these vivid
mustard yellow petals will stay around
until early June when the flowers begin
to fade and drop leaving a tangled
massive mess of light green foliage on a
stalk that stands some 1.8 metres tall
we'll leave oilseed raid there for the
time being and come back to it later in
the season it is very recognizable when
in flower not so when they drop but the
tractor Wheeling's remain and so it is
still distinguishable at any time during
the soaring calendar an oilseed rape
field is not suitable for landing
even after harvesting we need to
exercise caution because of the depth of
its tractor Wheeling's chattel
Wheeling's will be visible in every crop
field their presence will identify the
field has been one of crop and will give
a very good indication in springtime as
to its depth
if there are no willings then it's not a
cereal crop field you're looking at it
is probably a grass field by the time we
get to the end of June landable fields
are few and far between most crops have
essentially finished their growth stage
there are as tall as they're going to
get and from now on they will gradually
change color they are way too high for a
successful landing and because most
fields are still very shades of green
grass fields are hard to pick out some
of the winter sown cereals may very well
be beginning to ripen and to change
shade but notice that the crop fields
are still clearly showing tractor
Wheeling's a grass field may be used for
either grazing of stock or for the
production of silage or hay which will
be used through the winter months as
feed if it's a pasture field it will not
have any patterns of the surface if it's
used to produce feed it may have faint
Wheeling's at certain times of the year
see if you can pick out the grass field
in this picture
you
in most areas of the country but
especially in areas where Castle are
reared you will certainly find fields of
grass being grown to produce silage or
hay grass for silage is allowed to grow
thick and lush and is cut when it is
still green and growing the first cut is
made during May when the grass stands
about 60 centimeters this produces the
biggest yield for the farmer a further
one or two harvests may be taken later
in the season it is an important crop
for the stock farmer who will feed his
castle over the you enter a silage field
may be treated with fertilizer to
increase the yield and this is when it
may resemble a cereal field as the
machinery leaves behind Wheeling's in
the field after his has been coats
visage will lain Suede's in the field
until it is gathered up and either
loaded into a trailer for transportation
to a storage area on the farm or rolled
into large round bales and wrapped in
plastic for collection later the surface
that is left behind stands out as a
perfect landing area hay is cut in late
June when the grass has stopped growing
and begun to dry it may also be cut in
early August it is game cuts and swathe
but now it is left to dry hay can only
be made your own fine weather for this
reason if it gets wet it is of poor
quality and unpalatable Italy turns when
in the field to promote drying and once
it is ready will be bailed or rolled and
taken away for storage for the winter
months so back to our earlier picture
the grass fields in the center of the
frame because this is late June we can
say it's a hay field that's been cut and
is drying and spades ready for
collection it resembles a crop field
because of the parallel lines but these
are too close together to be tractor
Wheeling's
the color is that of a ripening crop but
it is too early in the season for the
cereals to be this color compared with
fields around and you can see they have
only just begun to change they are still
mostly green so by deduction week
determine the surface it will be unwise
to land in a silage or hay field such
that you are landing in swathe the Rd
and will cause a ground loop if you
catch a wing also the farmer will not be
very pleased with your arrival
especially if you delay his harvest
landing alongside in the smooth stems
that are left is not going to cause you
or the farmer any problems while we're
on the subject grass field we need to
take a look at pasture fields and stock
and inevitably stock fences
you
horses sheep cattle let's look at horses
first horses especially those bred for
racing are hugely expensive easily
spooked and become stressed very easily
a typical stirred farm is neat and tidy
with a regular at Tangela layout the
paddocks are generally small and
separated with definite well-defined
fences usually painted white
we can see we can easily land in any of
the large fields in the center of the
picture but we can also see the field
bottom right has horses in it landing
any of the adjacent fields may well
cause those horses to plannig they can
be very highly strung creatures and you
landing close by could be enough of a
fright to cause them to bolt they can
end up hurting themselves in their panic
and worse still if there is a mare in
foal at the time your third-party
insurance will probably not cover the
miscarriage of a prize racing horse
associated with the training of race
horses are the gallops used for exercise
these are usually close by the main farm
and can be excellent landing areas they
are generally clear of any obstructions
on the ground and should be clear from
anything that might endanger your
aircraft of course if there is any sign
of the gallops being used by horses they
must be avoided
what about sheep if we zoom in on the
field to the lower left regards the fact
it's next to a stud farm we can see that
in this state it is not possible to land
in sheep tend to spread themselves out
when grazing to the extent that they
will occupy the whole field like horses
sheep are very easily planets it would
tend to gather in a single flock but in
doing so will race around the field try
and find the biggest group a field of
sheep like this is not a suitable
landing area and so two cattle and in
particular dairy farming here we can see
a collection of green fields mosa
pasture fields the field would in the
immediate foreground is a crop of maize
it's mid-july and you would of course
expect any cereal crops to be ripened in
the process of harvesting by now the
fact that this one is green in July is
from a distance and obvious sign a
closer look at it and it becomes obvious
by the texture that it is not a grass
field and significantly notice no
tractor Wheeling's cows are by nature
extremely curious animals they all want
to investigate and taste anything new in
their field and can destroy a glider in
minutes if allowed near it avoid landing
in a field of cows unless there's
absolutely nothing else available if you
do land or Vash as the French say be
prepared to be set upon by the entire
herd in a matter of minutes they are
interested in your glider not you and
you will have to be quick and athletic
to prevent them getting close enough to
do damage do not leave your glider if
you do when you return it will be
destroyed apart from the beasts
themselves there is the additional
problem of casual fencing the grass
fields we can see in the middle of the
picture are divided by fences and whilst
we can discern where some of those
fences are others are not so obvious if
the fence is separating two empty
pasture fields and those who have not
had stopping them for some time or in
other words they haven't been grazed
recently
then the difference is even less obvious
same collection of fields and here we
can see that the field adjacent to the
farm buildings as grazing Castle in part
of it they are prevented from grazing
the majority field by fence but in this
picture we cannot actually see the fence
it may be an electric fence which the
farmer will move in order to strip graze
the field this particular fence and the
fence is in all of the other fields in
this picture are in fact permanent
fences but we cannot see them what we
can see however is a distinct color
change that may suggest the presence of
a fence
let's change position a little looking
at the fields at the bottom of the
picture we can see an obvious change in
color we can't see a fence but we can
imagine a fence being there looking at
the fields on the other side of the dirt
track we can see that there are distinct
divisions shown by obvious changes in
color where either permanent or electric
fences lie these fences will not only be
used to prevent stop grazing new ground
but it will also be used ravenna
disturbing previously grazed pasture to
enable it to regrow it is these changes
in color which gave give away the
possible presence of a fence and which
should make you very cautious the color
change may be very slight but any change
in color should be treated with caution
and requires further investigation and
examination for the presence of offence
of some description look at the area of
ground between the road and the track
there is something there but it is far
from obvious but we should start a think
fence because of that subtle change we
will get a little closer still and fly
around the area we are down to about
1000 feet now and we can see the color
changes across the areas to the right of
the track they are becoming obvious and
those changes in color are telling you
that there is something there if we were
considering this area of fields for a
landing then we would be looking very
carefully at these color changes and how
they divide the area
up we can see that to the right of the
dirt track the color changes are making
individual fields that are too small to
be of use between the dirt track on the
road however it looks more promising and
assuming the wind was favorable we might
be considering a landing parallel to the
road towards the buildings in the top
left of the picture nothing we have seen
in the previous pictures would suggest
that this is not a good plan we will
continue to fly around these fields and
look at them from different angles
remember we are looking at the area
between the road and the track and there
is detail beginning to become obvious
we'll highlight it for you there is
something there and here very difficult
to see at the moments but definitely
something there let's continue round now
we can see definite and distinct color
changes in the area we were considering
there are lighter patches of color
showing the lines of possible fences
making that area of poor choice but we
only discovered this by careful
examination and flying around several
sides of the field let's go down to
ground level the fence is actually in
the previous picture it is the climb
that divides all of these fields in this
series of pictures but up until the last
couple of slides it was invisible we
were suspicious that there may have been
offense in the latest lines because the
color change but the fence itself was
not visible and that fence could be
lethal if you try to land through it
let's go back to 1500 feet or so so we
have a slight color change which makes
you suspicious of a fence that color
change should be enough for us to decide
to land along the parent color change
rather than through it or as in this
case choose another field entirely even
when you know the fence is there it's
still difficult to identify there may be
other indicators that help us identify
the presence of offence let's zoom in
into a couple on this slide we can see
several areas where the grass has been
worn away
here for instance at the entrance to the
field weather stop gather and are led
away we can see a definite warn path
which is usually associated with the
gate or which is normally in the corner
of a field that corner being made up of
two fences this is a solid indicator
that we are indeed looking at a grass
plaster field and a glued good clue to
the presence of a fence another clue
along with the color change is the
presence of drinking troughs seen here
these troughs are symptoms placing
fences so that the cattle or sheep can
drink from either side look closely
along the color change and you may be
able to spot the drinking troughs
here we can see such troughs with a
fence or at least a color change running
through them water troughs can mean a
fence at least assume there is a fence
running between them and that fence can
be invisible until you are too close to
it so resolved to land along a color
change not across it if there is a fence
you will avoid it the simple message
about livestock is avoid landing in a
field that is already occupied you will
save yourself a great deal of trouble
you
there are other obstructions we need to
consider very carefully when selecting
our field and those are power wires or
telegraph wires these are power wires
they tend to run straight across a field
to take in the most direct route they
generally have three wires and sometimes
as here have a spur off in another
direction they can be tricky to see from
there and many times it's not the poles
that the first thing that you spot the
farmer card always getting close to the
poles with spring or sewing machinery
and quite often there is a bear patch
around the base or a circular pattern
around the poles of course knowing where
the wires are in a crop field if we are
not going to land in it is of little use
unless if we can pick out the lines of
the poles we can sometimes work out how
they may affect the field we are
interested in because power wires can be
very difficult to spot in the grass
field remember it's not the wires you're
going to see until the very last minute
it's the poles or evidence of the poles
if you can see a line of poles you can
avoid the wires if you can't see the
poles you won't see the wires
sometimes power wires or telephone wires
are supported by poles which are hidden
in hedgerows or trees it's common for
wires to run along the sides of the
roads especially telephone wires if
you're approaching overrode assume there
are telephone poles even if you can't
see them assume that they are there if
you attempt to approach through a gap in
the trees or bushes or lower overrode
boundary there is a real danger the
wires that you cannot see flying under
them at the last minute is not an option
flying through them can be fatal
around the end of May beginning of June
the crops have really finished their
growth stage they are as tall as they
are going to get and from now on they
will gradually change color barley will
start to turn a lighter shade of green
as it gradually ripens we have to be
careful as some strains of barley can
look a lot like newly cut grass from
certain angles and from a distance as
you get closer however a fly around the
field we can notice the trunk to
Wheeling's and they always point would
it being a crop field wheat will become
initially dark green in color as it
grows its last flag leaf and then the
head it will begin to turn a lighter
green and then ripen a little later than
barley as the season progresses the
fields become uniform in color with
distinct tractor Wheeling's some fields
may show storm damage where powerful
gusts have flattened the crop at this
time of year June into July when crop is
too long before the harvest suitable
landing fields can be hard to find we
are mainly focusing on grass and pasture
fields and depending on where you are
these can be tricky to spot it pays to
start looking earlier and higher by late
July early August depending on where you
are of what the weather has been like
cereal crops are ready for harvest they
have turned into a golden color and are
relatively dry it is important that the
crop is dry when it is cut send fine
weather the combines will be working
dawn to dusk and beyond to gather in the
crop
you
the combine does several things at once
it cuts the stalk separates the head and
the thrushes separating the grain from
the chef the grain is unloaded at
intervals by a trader driving alongside
which will take its load to the grain
store for drying and storage the straw
is thrown out to the back of the combine
and lays and swathe along its track
this is then gathered by baling machine
which will either Bale or roll the straw
which will later be used in the year for
winter bedding for castle or pigs as
well as being used as a feed in eastern
areas where there are less livestock on
more arable areas there is an excess of
straw if it is not required by the
farmer he may choose to simply chop it
into a mulch as it leaves the combine
and spread it on the field ready to be
plowed in to increase the soils organic
content the surface that is left is
smooth and firm and is perfect for
landing although the cut field is of a
similar color to uncut fields the
difference should be obviously enough to
tell them apart even at a distance the
real clue is in the texture gone are the
regular tram lines and the even
consistency of the surface the field
looks somehow scruffy and untidy look at
the random tracks formed by the tractors
and trailers as they take the shortest
distance between the work and combine
and the gate
so although in certain light and at a
certain angle a field that has been
harvested can look similar to a field of
standing corn we can guarantee that if
we see random tracks across the field it
has been harvested here we are looking
at a crop field and assuming any buyers
have been gathered and other factors are
favourable it is ideal for landing here
we can see a stubble field the bottom
half the field has straw lines the top
half has bales and we see the baling
machine working the straw lines the
random track across the ridges tells us
what they are obviously it would be
unwise to attempt a landing between the
bales we could if we had to however land
in the straw lines if we were careful
landing across them is not a good idea
they can be very deep and lines like
this for instance would certainly tear
your undercarriage doors off at the very
least but if we learnt along the lines
between the ridges so long as we keep
the wings level we should be ok
dipping the wing into a line of straw
however could ground loop the glider in
fact whenever we are landing the stubble
field we should always try to land along
the lines of cut if at all possible this
is the direction the field has been
worked it has been plowed and tilled and
sow and fertilized in the same direction
and all the ruts and tractor tracks will
be parallel if we try and land across
the direction of cut we should expect a
very rough and bumpy arrival may be
enough to damage our glider usually very
soon after the crop is gathered and the
straw has been picked up the land will
be cultivated a disc cultivator cuts up
the surface and incorporates the stubble
it leaves a soft surface which is still
okay for landing providing it hasn't
rained alternatively
a plow is used sometimes with a press to
consolidate the ground
either way this usually breaks up too
much of the previous crops root
structure and the
surface becomes too rough and soft for a
successful landing so we have been
through the whole of the soaring season
from spring through to autumn and we've
looked at the way things change as the
farming year progresses successful field
landings is a prerequisite of
cross-country gliding knowing what is
available and when is a great help as is
a working knowledge of the farming
countryside if you spare a thought to
the condition of the fields every time
you fly and get used to looking at them
and assessing them your ability and
confidence in choosing suitable fields
will grow and the prospects of landing
out will no longer hold any fear or
trepidation there have been many
articles written and published and sell
plane and gliding about the subject and
it would be a good idea to review these
when you can there are also some
important considerations about codes of
conduct on the legal aspect of landing
uninvited on somebody else's property
available on the British gliding website
it's important you know your rights as
well as understand the landowners point
of view say flying and happy landings